So we're now looking into salinity power, a thing
that's very little recognized. For instance,
when that brine flows into the Colorado River and
it's diluted, the free energy is as though that
brine has fallen down a 7,000-foot dam.
7,000-foot dam. That's high energy density. If
you're going to let it get in the Colorado anyway,
why, you might as well get the power out of it. Now,
that's kind of a foolish thing, because if you're
going to dam it up, why, you might as well shoot it in
the Gulf and get the power out of it. But this is
something we're now working on, which is salinity
power. It's a totally invisible sort of power. But
every little agricultural drainage ditch that's
going into the Great Salt Lake, for instance, has a
megawatt per cubic foot per second. is the free
energy of that going into the Great Salt Lake. It's
the highest of all the natural forms of energy.
It's certainly the most concentrated, the
natural forms of energy of that certain level, not
coal or oil or
lightning, of course.
So we're not going to overlook it, and we're trying
to see. It's a strange sort of energy because of the
curiosities of saltwater. But that's a whole
other subject. I don't know whether you want to go
into it or not. No, I want to know one thing now. Why
is saltwater energy? Only one thing? Well, I want
to know a lot, but I want to know one thing
immediately. Why is saltwater energy
differently construed than freshwater energy?
Oh, well, no. You've got me wrong. OK. If you take,
say, brine and mix it with fresh water, but you
could mix it with seawater because it's so much
more concentrated. If you separate them by a
semipermeable membrane, osmotic membrane, and
allow this to go to equilibrium, the fresh water
would go into this brine. And if you allow this to
take place without much dilution, It would raise
the brine 7,000 feet. You could now pour it off up
there and run a Pelton well with it or something and
generate energy. Well, this is a real expression
of the free energy. The peculiarity about the
thing is that if you release that much energy in a
reaction like putting brine with fresh water
together, you would expect it to heat up. If you
release that much energy, the energy's got to go
somewhere. You'd expect it to heat up, but it
doesn't. The temperature changes
automatically. essentially nothing. And that's
because of the peculiarities of the substance
sodium chloride. Sodium chloride has a strange
property. Almost nothing else has it. And that is
that it produces
disorder in the water at just about the rate it
releases energy. So it all goes into what's called
entropy. Now, if the Great Salt Lake had been
anything other than sodium chloride, let's say it
had been magnesium sulfate, people on their inner
tubes floating down the little streams in the
Great Salt Lake would have burned their ears off.
Or if it had been something else, ammonium
nitrate, God forbid, or ammonium sulfate. Yeah,
ammonium sulfate. There are frozen errors. There
have been big temperature changes when that fresh
water flowed in. Nobody would ever doubt that
there was plenty of energy. But because sodium
chloride is the dominant ion, there's a dominant
molecule in there, electrolyte in there, what
happens is that the energy is soaked up into
increasing heat capacity at just the rate it's
made. And so it doesn't appear as temperature.
It's there perfectly well in a different form. All
we have to do is learn how to utilize it. It's a
tremendous lot. You see, all of the Midwest is
underlain by brines, as you may know. And there's
also Texas, as God knows, your oil wells. When do
they quit drilling? When they hit brine. And that
all is a power source, every bit of it, and by no
means an inconsiderable one.
Did you first become interested in the issue of
food and food expansion through the ocean when you
were in Pakistan? No, I've always been more or less
interested in it. For a long time, yeah. I was 62, I
think. When did you interview Ravel? Oh, over the
July the 4th weekend. You did, huh? Yeah. He's an
interesting guy, a great guy. At his home? Yeah.
Yeah. No, I was... What I want to know is what, as a
man involved in oceans, looking and has been
looking a long time at things like food
production, mariculture, what was the impact on
you psychologically in an underdeveloped
country for the first time like Pakistan? Well,
that wasn't exactly the first time I'd been in that
country.
Your reaction to a country like that, of course, is
very complicated. And one can spend hours talking
about that one subject. A little peculiar, isn't
it? There is so much misery. There's so much
poverty. And people accept it so well. The most
frightening thing, probably, about India and
Pakistan is how fast you can get used to it. I mean,
you shouldn't be able to get used to it. You should
not be able to get used to it. Yet, you know, these
people are not without their total
disadvantages. I mean, without all the
advantages in some way. You look at all the
crippled people in that country and the defective
people. You see them on the streets, and you're
horrified by it. What do we do with our defective
people in the United States? We hide them. They
have a hell of a poor time, don't they? They're old
people, the old crippled people, the insane
people. They're all hidden somewhere. I mean,
even people just with bad facial scars. They're
hidden. That country, those people, at any rate,
have a better time, don't they? They're with
society. And those are kind of interesting
points, it seems to me. The United States has such a
culture of perfection, you see. You really can't
even be bald, much less have your nose missing. or a
disfiguration, crippled iron or something. That
country, those people live much freer lives. So as
I say, what would our society look like if we really
left all of our people on the streets and accepted
them? Quite different. And the old people, the old
crippled people, that would be on the streets in
India and Pakistan are hidden away in our country
and living miserable lives. OK. As a matter of
fact, I was talking to a Texan on the airplane just
about that the other day. I said, well, you sure got
a point there. He said, never thought I would.
Yeah.
Remind me, does this turn your work into a I've been
to India quite a bit because my sister lived there
for 20 years or 18 years, yeah. And? In India. In
what capacity? Well, her husband was an
architect, and she's an artist, and they built
buildings and designed buildings and built
schools. They built the University of Karachi and
the Institute of Buddhist Studies at... at the
heavens in Burma. And quite a number of structures
throughout India. And I used to visit there
occasionally, or visit them. So I was not totally
unacquainted with that area.
OK. Now, in 1968, I had bootstrap course. Oh, yeah.
That was kind of fun. And a statement of fact, are
you asking me? Well, I'm asking you how it came
about.
Well, that was an idea. And I'm not so sure how well
it's ever going to be utilized. But it was an idea of
a car that pulled itself down without these
tremendous weights that you use for car barrels.
and took a long core with a very light core. I think
it's the only core that ever took a core that
weighed much more than the device itself. And it's
just an interesting configuration of a core, it
seems to me, that is not without merit for taking
very long cores to the ocean bottom with simple
equipment so that you don't have to have these
immense winches, very large cores.
Now,
it seems to me that in more recent years... I'd like
your wife's opinion on that. I'll write you and
tell you as a matter of fact. It appears that in
recent years you've published more on marine
biology problems, such as fisheries and
productivity. That was the reason for my question
about Pakistan. Why a turn in this direction?
Well, I don't think it's a turn, exactly. It's a
culmination of some ideas that I've been working
on for quite a few years. Different theories,
alternate theories of food webs, how they're put
together. The marine biologist, are you on? Yes.
The marine biologist suffers from, I think, the
delusion that he can see everything that goes
forth, that goes on in the ocean. Given enough...
plankton nets, enough ships, enough graduate
students, and one thing or another, you can trace
what happens to the food material in the ocean. I
think that's totally a delusion. You can't do it.
The food web is far too complicated. Just take the
curious case of reproductive products. Every
adult creature in the ocean is throwing out eggs
and sperm, which account for maybe 50% of the
potential growth of that population. And it's all
invisibly flowing down into the food web. You see,
we're so misled by our terrestrial experience. We
think that the immediate effect of reproduction
is to add to the adult stocks by direct transfer of
biomass. That is, a cow has a calf. The calf is a
large proportion of an adult. It feeds on paternal
sources. It immediately then, after it has
weaned, feeds on the same source that the adults
feed on, and adds to the adult biomass. The ocean is
a totally different situation, except for the
marine mammals and some sharks. This isn't the way
it is at all. The reproductive products are
subtracted from the adult biomass. The eggs are
pulled out of the adult biomass. The amount of
survival of that material that comes back to the
adult is absolutely zero. The egg that survives
down here goes through the larval form, juvenile
form, and finally becomes an adult. The survival
of that egg is zero in that. So we forget that the
ocean is in many respects opposed, opposite, than
the land. Reproductive products, which are a
major tax on all creatures, is not added to the
adult biomass in the ocean, but subtracted from
it. And I think we need these kinds of totally
different viewpoints. And we need to formalize
them in some way. And that's what I've been doing
the last few years. You see, we're much misled by
the fact that we're terrestrial creatures. The
ocean is, to a great extent, a foreign and dimly
understood system and the life in it is
differently adapted. We forget those
differences. We tend to treat it like if we were,
like if we were land ecology. Is it fair to say that
you're more optimistic about food production
from the oceans than your colleagues? I don't, I
wouldn't speak for my colleagues, but I'm quite
optimistic about food production in the ocean,
yes. I think we've got to understand that we have to
act rationally. I don't think we can act as sort of a
way of, for instance, passing a law that we must
protect the porpoises. We have to first
understand what's the relationship between
porpoises and tuna. It may be in the 30 or 40 years of
intensive tuna fishery that we've greatly
stimulated the porpoise. It may be they're in all
out of proportion. It's a marvelous to me that tuna
can survive in competition of the porpoise.
profligate, warm-blooded animal inhabiting the
ocean. If you've ever seen a school of purpose to
sweep through a gulf, it's incredible. Frothing
water where they clean everything out as they go.
Now, isn't it funny that we should, because of soft
hearts or something, should now have passed a law
that says, ah, we must do this thing, which may be
the worst possible tactic, is to pull the tuna out
without hurting the purpose, which are in direct
competition with one another. Or do we know
whether they're in direct competition? Do we know
that 40 years of tuna fishery has stimulated the
porpoise or not? Do we know that they're in
abnormal abundance or normal abundance? We don't
know. We just passed a law that says you've got to
protect the porpoise. That may really extinguish
the tuna fishery.
You see, all our marine fisheries are conducted in
this way that stimulate the unwanted species. We
have no use for the porpoise. Even the Japanese can
hardly use it. And by law now, we make a technique
that reduces the wanted species and increases the
unwanted species. I went up to British Columbia
not long ago, and here they have radio advisories
to the salmon fishery about where you can fish
without getting your net full of dogfish. Now,
this is the same technique as the boy that learns
how to catch the trout out of the pond without
catching a sucker, isn't he? He increases the
suckers and decreases the trout. Now, here's a
whole organization to decrease the salmon and
increase the dogfish.
You see, you've got to take the weeds. The
fisheries in the world are conducted like a blind
man who can't see the weeds in his garden. is always
pulling up the corn instead of the weeds, and then
wondering why he's got less and less corn each
year.
So are you suggesting, then, that more study ought
to be done? Well, I'm just trying to point out these
viewpoints, which are different than the
conventional, the traditional way in which
people have gone to look at these things. Many
people say that fishing is already an optimal.
that the ocean cannot produce many more
fisheries, that fisheries are very inefficient.
It depends on what level you do this, of course,
doesn't it? And what level you conduct your
fisheries. We're conducting, if you were to look
at it in terrestrial terms, we're conducting our
fisheries now as though we were trying to feed the
human race on tigers. It just takes too god-amany
cows to feed the tigers, doesn't it? Actually,
we're probably even higher than that. Whatever
eats tigers, I've forgotten. Is there anything?
We're conducting our fisheries at that level.
No tribe in this right mind ever tried to feed
itself on tigers. Took too many deer or buffalo or
whatever it was. So the closer we get down to things
like the Anchiveta fishery and Drew and so forth,
the larger and larger, and the more we go towards
the juveniles. The mortality of these things in
the ocean is so great that probably we are
justified in taking juvenile. But the thing we do
have to do is see what the effects of our fishery are
on the competitors. We're always stimulating the
competitors of what we want to catch. Those kind of
things have to be pointed out. Yet the law is so
indirect that there's really no way to have any
flexibility, you see. There is no way to set up a
commercial fishery that really trims and
controls a fishery in multi-species modes that it
should. There's no theory to handle it. I tried to
develop a theory, and it looks like it might make
some sense.
What was joint task force number one? to whom you
submitted numerous secret reports. That was the
Joint Task Force bikini hunt. First test. Abel and
Baker test. Now much of the material you published
from 45 to 47 from Berkeley was related to the
physical surveillances of beaches along the
Pacific. Was this defense information for
amphibious landings primarily? Well, it was more
general than that. It was trying to understand the
nature of beaches and amphibious landings
wherever it was, not defending the Pacific coast
against amphibious landings, no, but rather
guarding our own amphibious landing. Could you
describe any work that you did on sea mines that's
no longer classified? What were you? Oh, boy.
Let's see. Can I come up with that?
Well, as I said very early, there's quite a bit I
can't certainly still classify. Quite different
ideas about sea mines.
One thing I can say is I took almost a year off back in
1952 or so, 53 maybe, to study land mines.
under the theory that landmine is essentially the
same kind of a weapon as a sea mine, except it has the
ability to evolve much more rapidly. Every Texas
farmer that gets into the army thinks he can go out
and play around with some primacord and
explosives and develop a new landmine, and nobody
in their right mind fiddles around with a sea mine.
There you're talking about you're
on a ship. You can't possibly screw around being
innovative. with 300 pounds of TNT. But everybody
feels they know something about landmines and
they can make innovation. And there are some
tremendous innovations in landmines. In fact,
they'd have near beat us in Korea and in
Vietnam also. The innovations were tremendous.
What I was trying to see was Does this evolution of
landmines have a forecasting ability on the
evolution of sea mines? Are some of these
technologies that were developed and which were
so extremely difficult to combat that were
developed with landmines by small-scale
innovation transferable to sea mines? I thought
that was a reasonably good contribution I made on
that subject. And here you have an evolutionary
sequence that you can begin to understand and what
the steps have been between measures and
countermeasures and counter-countermeasures
and so forth. See if those were transferable into
the ocean, and indeed they are. Is nuclear
blasting to form harbors and channels still a
feasible idea? Oh, sure. The Russians have been
doing it, of course. It's not a feasible idea for
the United States to do. I think the French might do
it to
make harbors. Those great harbors of Bikini, I
rode around in one of them two weeks after the
blast. Beautiful, vast, blue harbors that make
supertankers... A reality. Bring in a 200-foot
draft ship and it can be made like that. But the
whole plowshare program was conducted with such
insensitivity, I think, that it does not become a
possibility for the United States to proceed in
any way. You know, they were going to blast a
channel through the Sierra Nevadas to let the smog
out of Los Angeles or Start out with blasting a new
sea level canal through Panama. Things that
scared people to death. Were you involved, by the
way, with that plan to open up a new Panama Canal? To
some extent, yeah. Did you think it were a feasible
idea? From
an engineering standpoint? Yeah, from an
engineering standpoint. Of course. From an
engineering standpoint, from a social
standpoint. From a social engineering
standpoint, it was idiocy.
You've got to start out small on something like
that. You know what I want to do? I want to take my
family and go out to Bikini and live around the
edges of the crater out there and take some
National Geographic-type articles and live on
the lip of a nuclear crater. This great mile and a
half It was 300 feet deep. There was new fish coming
in, new corals, new development in one thing or
another. That was kind of the way that one wanted to
feed this into the social system. A National
Geographic harbor of a family of scientists went
out and lived on the lips of a bikini crater. That
would have made sense to me. To me, too. What
happened to that idea? I didn't get anywhere with
it.
In fact, some of my best writing is undoubtedly in
proposals that never got funded. My most
persuasive, my most thoughtful, my most
penetrating writing is lost in proposals.
There. OK. What is the future of deep sea ports?
Open sea ports? Open sea ports. Oh, well, of
course. As far as petroleum and liquid fuels and
things like that, it's gigantic. That's where
it's all going to be conducted. Ships are going to
be built at sea, are being built at sea, assembled
at sea at any rate, and they're never going to touch
shore. You consider this inevitable? It's not
only inevitable, it's here.
What about the idea of the proposed sea dock in the
Gulf? I don't know. Anything about the sea dock in
the Gulf? Well, the concept of- Is that a
physician? A hospital? Hospital. So in other
words, is it fair to say that you see these docks
being built for the transport of oil in places like
the Gulf here and the Gulf of California? I don't
know if they're going to be docks. They're going to
be monobuies of some sort, I think. Why should they
be docks? But I see no reason. Well, one thing I
really don't understand. You can perhaps
elucidate me. Huh? What is the tremendous virtue
of a free port? I mean, look at Hong Kong. Well, of
course, now it's a special case because it's an
outlet of goods from mainland China. But free
ports around the world prosper tremendously.
What happens if you have a free port right in the
middle of the ocean somewhere? All the ships have
to come in and trade goods. You can have a nuclear
power plant there to run it. It's a big enclosed
thing. You can do some have some fisheries, all
kinds of things you can do that would not be
accepted in coastal waters, like the release of
fisheries waste and so on, nuisance level of
nuclear waste. And you can have a free port. Is
there virtue in having just a free port out in the
middle of the ocean somewhere where people can
trade without tax?
What is it? I'm not sure countries can move any
longer to free trade. I'm not sure countries can
move any longer to free trade. They can. I'm not
sure that's economically feasible for
countries. Well, very few of them have... Well,
export limits are much fewer than import limits.
So, in principle, you can have some sort of free
trade in the middle of the sea. Is this an idiotic
idea? No. You don't think so? No. What about
spillhouses, cities on the sea? I think that's all
fun. And John Craven, too, of course, is working on
this. That's all great fun. I don't know why people
want to live there. I can count a billion places
where you could sit down in Los Angeles and never
find it again, but most of the world is
uninhabited, as you well know. It's only these
coastal strips that is covered over by this
incrustation of human beings.